Add release note content type guidelines (#4905)
elastic/docs-content: contribute-docs/content-types/release-notes.md

---
description: "Guidelines for writing effective release notes content in changelog YAML files for Elastic products."
---

# Release notes

This page provides guidelines for writing useful and consistent release notes for Elastic products.

> This page and the associated changelog schema can be used by humans and LLMs to draft new release notes or to evaluate existing content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this content type and the associated schema to draft new release notes or to evaluate existing content.
```

Use this page to:

- Understand the purpose and structure of release notes
  - Learn about the different types
  - Determine when to include optional information such as impact and actions
- Write clear, user-focused content

> - Evaluate existing release notes against the standards outlined here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Understand the purpose and structure of release notes.
  - Learn about the different types.
  - Determine when to include optional information such as impact and actions.
- Write clear, user-focused content.
- Evaluate existing release notes against the standards outlined here.
```

The following elements apply to specific types of changes:

- **Impact**: For breaking changes, deprecations, or known issues, describe how the user's environment is affected.
- **Action**: For breaking changes, deprecations, or known issues, describe what users must do to mitigate the change.
- **Subtype**: For breaking changes, further refine the category of change. For example, you can have API, configuration, or plugin breaking changes.

## Best practices

When creating changelog entries, follow these best practices:

- **Consider the audience**: Remember that release notes are read by developers, system administrators, end users, and support teams. Focus on what problems are solved or how users are affected, not implementation details.
- **Keep it concise**: Release notes should be scannable. Users often read many entries quickly.
- **Be specific**: Avoid vague descriptions. Explain exactly what changed and why it matters.
- **Use consistent language**: Follow the same terminology used in the product documentation.
- **Link to related content**: Include links to documentation and related issues when helpful.

> - **Test your descriptions**: Have someone unfamiliar with the change read your entry to ensure it's clear.

Author: I don't have a strong opinion myself, but 3/4 existing content types use this so for now I just followed the pattern.

> ### Choosing the right type [changelog-types]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Choose the changelog type [changelog-types]
```

- There are important details users should know.
- The change affects multiple components or has broader implications.
- You need to explain limitations or caveats.

Follow these best practices:

- **Keep it concise**: Use a maximum of 600 characters.
- **Focus on user value**: Explain what users can do or what problems are solved.
- **Provide context**: Help users understand when or why they would use this.
- **Include relevant details**: Describe configuration changes, API changes, or behavioral differences.
- **Use code blocks**: Consider the layout of your configuration examples and code snippets.

#### Good description examples

- This enhancement allows you to configure custom authentication providers through the security settings. Previously, only built-in providers were supported.
- Fixes an issue where queries with date range filters could cause excessive memory usage in clusters with many shards. The fix optimizes memory allocation for date range queries.

#### Poor description examples

- "Internal refactoring": Doesn't explain user impact.
- "See PR #12345 for details": Doesn't provide information, only a reference.

> - Repeating the title verbatim, which adds no value.

Reviewer: Could this go into a table?

Author: Are you envisioning a table with "before" and "after columns to show how poor titles could be re-written (we do have some of those in existing internal docs we could revisit) or just a column that explains what's good/poor about each example? Or something else entirely?
